Auth Token Support Docs in 10.9 (#7431)
mendix/docs: content/en/docs/refguide/runtime/session-management.md

---
title: "Session Management"
url: /refguide/session-management/
category: "Mendix Runtime"
description: "Describes how sessions are established and managed."
tags: ["Runtime", "Mendix Client", "Login", "Session", "authentication"]
weight: 35
---

## 1 Introduction 

When a user signs in to an application, the Mendix Runtime establishes a session that persists as long as the user remains active within the application. The session is supposed to expire after a certain amount of inactivity, determined by the time elapsed since the last runtime request in accordance with the session timeout.

Mendix versions 10.9.0 and above, use authentication tokens to keep a session active while users are not actively working in the app. This replaces earlier approaches for long-lived sessions, improving security and providing a more unified solution for session management across various types of application. This means that long-lived sessions are now supported for both online and offline applications, whether native or web-based.

### 2 Authentication Token

### 2.1 Enable Authentication Token

> We now support a new core client login API, `login2`, that allows you to pass an extra parameter, `useAuthToken`. You can pass `true` to enable authentication token or `false` to disable it. When the runtime receives this parameter during the login action, it adds an HttpOnly cookie `useAuthToken` indicating that an authentication token should be generated during the client startup.

Reviewer: I think an example would be useful here. Or at least a link to the document which describes calling the new API.

And if the user has to call the API directly, perhaps a link to the API spec as well?

Author: It is part of the client API docs which should be at the release of 10.9

Author: Example with useAuthToken set to true
```

mx.login2("fred", "fred's unguessable password", true, function() {
    console.log("success");
}, function() {
    console.log("wrong password");
});
```

Reviewer: Should we add this example, as I suggest here: https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/7431/files#r1528426157

Author: No, It should be part of the client API docs https://apidocs.rnd.mendix.com/10/client/mx.html or https://apidocs.rnd.mendix.com/10/client-react/mx.html depending on the used client.

This approach enhances security, as these cookies are inaccessible to anything other than the server.

### 2.3 Authentication Token Expiry

There is a custom runtime setting, `com.mendix.webui.HybridAppLoginTimeOut` that determines the validity of the authentication token. If no value is set, the token remains valid for one year.

### 3 Application Behavior

### 3.1 Native and Offline PWA Applications

This feature maintains backward compatibility, so we preserve the previous session management approach for existing applications. For upgraded offline applications, whether native or web, that currently use the old login API, `login`, are now supposed to use the new authentication token system by default. You can always disable this behavior by using the new API, login2, and setting the useAuthToken parameter to false.

### 3.2 Client-Runtime Session Management Flow

> {{< figure src="/attachments/refguide/runtime/session.png" alt="The Session Management Flow between client and the runtime." >}}

Reviewer: Could you add the link to plantuml which creates this image. The it is easier to update it, if necessary? Thanks.

Author: [Plantuml link](https://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/uml/bPB1Rjim44Jl-efjV7M3n4Lww2687TSd5oZgzbOWeAMnj91Cgikb7AVklnTI65iA3BGv211dXyCt8E-y6j6mhP9tMc0BMbS1kPXzuaksjH6pfRL9ornSiDczgvpGQ5UmecVm-1LWKz3lP9ggauMp6grN7s_ci-b9Nl4JQ7ALJ4NSRkZffAFdUXA5yrap9ndaUJ07wbMvdrK1oP8tMB95VpwQVlXyivYTPhq-_VbN8yefryPg3tKeluRvazIdCLryWStuaUuhXjKBCfxIxlTuni3zBLZbBMW5QI2TtNU_D9fVBoQBUM9IvSOeOinn7Nr9J7z_UnkLJxHqELlQiHOKFAP1Y--kXANkgg0Gyb1IHoe1IJol7z10UBCdBT06o9XIWL5qWeVtxEoOl6b0tEPqUcRKh8t7c7vQCZQZdN3SqaByY13jg9z3gNCbmr-UAoBjg_9AEVGX-X_QS-WST5eWBRleVkcOFwOC5RG5xW1pMCXB9Js22LGO3GQ4mRFDpp1VzYcUwLjaNxksFMinsDDo9uV3eVtUrDLi53A8AemdFDOioFvnUusfE6FTazjqQnEqEBLboygcugTpVLbV-lr_lIJ3g-VQKo9Vr_yEDWlRwYy0)

Reviewer: Sorry, missed that you had already put it in an earlier comment:
https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/7431#issuecomment-1991684567

---
title: "Session Management"
url: /refguide/session-management/
category: "Mendix Runtime"
description: "Describes how sessions are established and managed."
tags: ["Runtime", "Mendix Client", "Login", "Session", "authentication"]
weight: 20
---

## 1 Introduction 

When a user login to an application, the Mendix Runtime establishes a session that persists as long as the user remains active within the application. The session is supposed to expire after a certain amount of inactivity, determined by the time elapsed since the last runtime request in accordance with the session timeout.

Mendix now utilizes authentication tokens instead of earlier approaches for long-lived sessions to keep them session active while users are not actively working in the app, improving security and providing a more unified solution for session management across various application types. Consequently, long-lived sessions are now supported for both online and offline applications, whether native or web-based.

### 2 Authentocation Token

### 2.1 Enable Authentication Token

> We now support a new core client login API, `login2`, that allows you to pass an extra parameter, `useAuthToken`. You can pass `true` to enable authentication token or `false` to disable it. When the runtime receives this parameter during the login action, it adds an HttpOnly cookie `useAuthToken` indicating that an authentication token should be generated in the later `get_session_data` action.

Reviewer 2: It think that "get_session_data action" will be confusing for users because get_session_data isn't an action like we use **action** in other places.

Author: what about changing it to `get_session_data` request?

Reviewer 2: Yes, or you could mention that it is during the client startup.

With the introduction of this new core login API, You can begin modeling your login page to utilize the authentication token. Additionally, you can provide end users the option to decide whether they want to be remembered or not.

### 2.2 Authentication Token Generation

When the runtime receives the `get_session_data`, it checks the existence of the `useAuthToken` cookies. If present, it adds an additional HttpOnly cookie holding the generated unique authentication token `authtoken`. This token is then used in the subsequent actions to authenticate the user and extend the session upon its expiration.

### 2.3 Authentication Token Expiry

> There is a custom runtime setting, `com.mendix.webui.HybridAppLoginTimeOut` that determines the validity of the authentication token. If no value is set, the token remains valid for one year.

Reviewer 2: Do we truly use a `Hybrid` setting for this?

Author: Yes, Its name is confusing as we don't support Hybrid anymore, but it is already used for the native auth token and we wanted our solution to be backwards compatible so we didn't want to add a new one.

Reviewer 2: Oke :)

### 3 Application Behaviour

### 3.1 Native and Offline PWA Applications

This feature maintains backward compatibility, so we preserve the previous session management approach for existing applications. For upgraded offline applications, whether native or web, that currently use the old login API, `login`, are now supposed to use the new authentication token system by default. You can always disable this behaviour by using the new API, login2, and setting the useAuthToken parameter to false.

### 4.1 Offline PWAs

> The key change is that Mendix now use authentication tokens to reinitialize the session  instead of the previous approach of keeping the users logged in for a longer period.

Reviewer 2: I think it is a bit strange to talk about "key changes" in the docs, we are only documenting the current behavior of the product

Author: Removed.

### 5.1 Native

> The key change is that Mendix now use HTTPOnly cookie to hold the authentication token instead of storing it on the device. This enhances security, as these cookies are inaccessible to anything other than the server.

Reviewer 2: I think it is a bit strange to talk about "key changes" in the docs, we are only documenting the current behavior of the product

Author: I mentioned that because we already support the old behaviour for the existing applications.

Author: Removed. They can just go and check the refguid9

Mendix versions 10.9.0 and above, use authentication tokens to keep a session active while users are not actively working in the app. This replaces earlier approaches for long-lived sessions in offline-first apps, improving security. This approach provides a more unified solution for session management, allowing long-lived sessions in  both online and offline applications, whether native or web-based.

If you create a new app in Mendix version 10.9.0 or above, session management will work as described below.

If you are using an app created in a version below 10.9.0, then long-lived sessions will be used for offline-first apps. See the [Sessions](/refguide/mobile/introduction-to-mobile-technologies/progressive-web-app/#sessions) section of *Progressive Web App* for more information.

### 2 Authentication Token

If you are using standard Mendix sign in flows in version 10.9.0 or above, the authentication token will be generated automatically. If you have custom JavaScript or Java sign in code, you will have to ensure that it uses the `login2` API if you want to create authentication tokens. 

### 2.1 Enable Authentication Token

> {{% todo %}}Need a link to login2 api documentation{{% /todo %}}

Reviewer: Where is the spec for the login2 API - would be good to link to it.

Author: It should be released at 10.9

Reviewer: OK - do you have a link I could use, or do I need to ask nearer the time?

Author: https://apidocs.rnd.mendix.com/10/client/mx.html or https://apidocs.rnd.mendix.com/10/client-react/mx.html depending on the used client.

Reviewer: Added,

> The `login2` API allows you to pass the parameter `useAuthToken`. The value `true` enables the authentication token, `false` disables it. If the login action passes `true` to the runtime, the runtime adds an HttpOnly cookie `useAuthToken` indicating that an authentication token should be generated during the client startup.
> 

Reviewer: Does it make it clearer with an example?
```suggestion
The `login2` API allows you to pass the parameter `useAuthToken`. The value `true` enables the authentication token, `false` disables it. If the login action passes `true` to the runtime, the runtime adds an HttpOnly cookie `useAuthToken` indicating that an authentication token should be generated during the client startup.

For example
```java {linenos=false}
mx.login2("fred", "fred's unguessable password", true, function() {
    console.log("success");
}, function() {
    console.log("wrong password");
});
```
```

Author: This example will be included in the client API docs https://apidocs.rnd.mendix.com/10/client/mx.html or https://apidocs.rnd.mendix.com/10/client-react/mx.html depending on the used client.

Reviewer: OK - won't put it in this document as well, but have a link to the API spec.

Your login page can then utilize the authentication token. You can also provide end-users the option to decide whether they want to be remembered or not.

### 2.2 Authentication Token Generation

When the runtime receives the `get_session_data` request, it checks the existence of the `useAuthToken` cookies. If present, it adds an additional HttpOnly cookie holding the generated unique authentication token `authtoken`. This token is then used in the subsequent actions to authenticate the user and extend the session upon its expiration.

This approach enhances security, as these cookies are inaccessible to anything other than the server.

### 2.3 Authentication Token Expiry

> There is a custom runtime setting, [`com.mendix.webui.HybridAppLoginTimeOut`](/refguide/custom-settings/#commendixwebuiHybridAppLoginTimeOut) that determines how long the authentication token is valid for. If no value is set, the token remains valid for one year.

Reviewer: According to our documentation, the token never expires if this value isn't set.
https://docs.mendix.com/refguide/custom-settings/#commendixwebuiHybridAppLoginTimeOut

Author: Now, the authtoken is stored as an HttpOnly cookie, and we set the expiry value for the cookie using this timeout, but if it is not specified, we set a default value of one year.

Reviewer: So do I need to change the information in https://docs.mendix.com/refguide/custom-settings/#commendixwebuiHybridAppLoginTimeOut
![image](https://github.com/mendix/docs/assets/35492184/b39ca583-5348-4dd5-8005-0838f83ce604)

Author: Yes, you can change it.

Reviewer: Added in 665c3a223a0b228da6615c1543f4974082af6797

### 3 Application Behavior

### 3.1 Native and Offline PWA Applications

> This feature maintains backward compatibility, so we preserve the previous session management approach for existing applications. For upgraded offline applications, whether native or web, that currently use the old login API, `login`, are now supposed to use the new authentication token system by default. You can always disable this behavior by using the new API, login2, and setting the useAuthToken parameter to false.

Reviewer: I'm afraid I don't understand what we are saying here?
The best I can do is:
* this feature mimics the long-lived sessions for offline first apps
* old apps will continue to use the long-lived sessions mechanism even if they are upgraded to 10.9
* all apps created in 10.9 will have the same behavior as offline-first apps did before
* you can turn off this behavior if you are writing custom java or javascript using login2 by setting the value of the `useAuthToken` parameter to `false`.

I'm not sure I've understood it correctly, so I think it could do with some clarification once I'm sure I understand it.

Author: Old offline PWA apps will continue to use the long-lived sessions mechanism, but upgraded apps will use the new system by default if they already use the old API but developers can disable this default system if they use the login2 and set useAuthToken param to false. 

Online apps can use the new login API to enable the authentication token system.

Author: Since our solution is backwards compatible, the offline PWA apps (not upgraded to 10.9 or above) will continue to use the previous long-lived sessions mechanism and the existing native apps should continue to work as the previously old system of authentication tokens, in which the authentication token is generated during login and stored on the device.

Upgraded offline apps (native or web) will use the new system by default if they already use the old API; however, developers can disable this default system if they use the login2 and set useAuthToken param to false.

Online apps can use the new login2 API to enable the authentication token system.

Reviewer: Updated description in 48e98aeb43628fb87fe0628d302dfa9a7a21036e

## 1 Introduction 

When an end-user signs in to an application, the Mendix Runtime establishes a session that persists as long as the end-user remains active within the application. The session expires after a certain amount of inactivity, determined by the time elapsed since the last runtime request in accordance with the session timeout.

Mendix versions 10.9.0 and above, use authentication tokens to keep a session active while users are not actively working in the app. This replaces earlier approaches for long-lived sessions in offline-first apps, improving security. This approach provides a more unified solution for session management, allowing long-lived sessions in  both online and offline applications, whether native or web-based.

If you create a new app in Mendix version 10.9.0 or above, session management will work as described below.

If you are using an app created in a version below 10.9.0, then long-lived sessions will be used for offline-first apps. See the [Sessions](/refguide/mobile/introduction-to-mobile-technologies/progressive-web-app/#sessions) section of *Progressive Web App* for more information.

### 2 Authentication Token

> If you are using standard Mendix sign in flows in version 10.9.0 or above, the authentication token will be generated automatically. If you have custom JavaScript or Java sign in code, you will have to ensure that it uses the `login2` API if you want to create authentication tokens. 

Author: Offline applications, whether native or web, that use the old login API, are now supposed to use the new authentication token system by default.

Reviewer: This doesn't seem to be the same as what you say here: https://github.com/mendix/docs/pull/7431#discussion_r1527863770

> existing offline PWA apps will continue to use the previous long-lived sessions mechanism and the existing native apps should continue to work as the previously old system of authentication tokens,

Author: I updated the comment. I hope now it is more clear.

Reviewer: Updated description in 48e98aeb43628fb87fe0628d302dfa9a7a21036e

## 1 Introduction 

When an end-user signs in to an application, the Mendix Runtime establishes a session that persists as long as the end-user remains active within the application. The session expires after a certain amount of inactivity, determined by the time elapsed since the last runtime request and the [session timeout](/refguide/custom-settings/#SessionTimeout).

Mendix versions 10.9.0 and above can use authentication tokens to keep a session active while users are not actively working in the app. For offline-first apps, this replaces earlier approaches for long-lived sessions, improving security.

This approach provides a more unified solution for session management, allowing long-lived sessions to be used in online, as well as offline applications, whether native or web-based. For example, you could customize the sign in to an online app to provide a "remember me" function so that end-users do not have to provide their credentials again if their session expires.

If you create a new app in Mendix version 10.9.0 or above, session management will work as described below.

> If you are using an app created in a version below 10.9.0, then long-lived sessions will be used for offline-first apps. See the [Sessions](/refguide/mobile/introduction-to-mobile-technologies/progressive-web-app/#sessions) section of *Progressive Web App* for more information. Online apps in Mendix versions below 10.9.0 cannot have their sessions extended.

Author: Online apps below 10.9.0 should work with KeepAlive approach check this https://docs.mendix.com/refguide7/tricky-custom-runtime-settings/#21-web-client-settings

Reviewer: So should we say 
```suggestion
If you are using an app created in a version below 10.9.0, then long-lived sessions will be used for offline-first apps. See the [Sessions](/refguide/mobile/introduction-to-mobile-technologies/progressive-web-app/#sessions) section of *Progressive Web App* for more information.

Online apps in Mendix versions below 10.9.0 have a different approach, using the [EnableKeepAlive](/refguide/tricky-custom-runtime-settings/#session-duration) setting to send keep alive requests from the client.
```

## 2 Authentication Token

### 2.1 Authentication Token Generation

When the runtime receives the `get_session_data` request, it checks the existence of the `useAuthToken` cookies. If present, it adds an additional HttpOnly cookie holding the generated unique authentication token `authtoken`. This token is then used in the subsequent actions to authenticate the user and extend the session when it expires.

This approach enhances security, as these cookies are inaccessible to anything other than the server.

### 2.2 Enable Authentication Token

> For offline-first apps using standard Mendix sign in with version 10.9.0 or above, the authentication token will be generated automatically.

Author: ```suggestion
For offline-first apps using the client API `login`, with version 10.9.0 or above, the authentication token system will be used by default.
```

> If you want to generate authentication tokens in your online app, you will have to use custom JavaScript or Java sign in code using the `login2` API. 

Author: It is not correct to mention java action here. login2 is a client API.

Author: ```suggestion
If you want to generate authentication tokens in your online app, you have to use the client API `login2`. 
```

> The `login2` API allows you to pass the parameter `useAuthToken`. The value `true` enables the authentication token, `false` disables it. If the login action passes `true` to the runtime, the runtime adds an HttpOnly cookie `useAuthToken` indicating that an authentication token should be generated during the client startup. Your login flow will then utilize the authentication token.

Author: ```suggestion
The `login2` API allows you to pass the parameter `useAuthToken`. The value `true` enables the authentication token, `false` disables it. If the login action passes `true` to the runtime, the runtime adds an HttpOnly cookie `useAuthToken` indicating that an authentication token should be generated during the client startup. 
```

> You could also provide end-users a "remember me" option so they can decide whether they want to be remembered or not.

Author: ```suggestion
You could also model your login page to provide end-users with a "remember me" option so they can decide whether they want to be remembered or not.
```

Follow the links below to find the `login2` API specifications for the following:

* [React](https://apidocs.rnd.mendix.com/10/client-react/mx.html#.login2)
* [Non-react (Dojo)](https://apidocs.rnd.mendix.com/10/client/mx.html#.login2)  

### 2.3 Authentication Token Expiry

There is a custom runtime setting, [`com.mendix.webui.HybridAppLoginTimeOut`](/refguide/custom-settings/#commendixwebuiHybridAppLoginTimeOut) that determines how long the authentication token is valid for. If no value is set, the token remains valid for one year.

## 3 Application Behavior

### 3.1 Native and Offline PWA Applications

> In Mendix version 10.9.0 and above, login should always support authentication tokens. 

Author: ```suggestion
This feature maintains backward compatibility, If end users haven't updated their apps on their devices, but the runtime is a newer version, it still functions correctly to support the previous session management methods.

Upgraded offline-first applications to version 10.9 or above, that currently use the client API, `login`, will use the new authentication token system by default as we internally call the new API login2 and enable the authentication token system. If you do not want your offline-first app to create an authentication token, you can disable it by using the new API, `login2`, but setting the `useAuthToken` parameter to `false`.

Applications created with version 10.9 or above, whether offline or online, have the flexibility to enable or disable the authentication token system via the client API 'login2' and set the 'useAuthToken' parameter according to their preferences.
```

Reviewer: This is the bit which I find is confusing.

> we preserve the previous session management approaches

I think it is clear that we are talking about apps in 10.9 and above so I don't think we should talk about "preserving" anything. My understanding is that in 10.9 and above they have to use the new mechanism. If you talk about preserving things it sounds like they don't have to do anything.

> are now supposed to use the new authentication token system by default

This doesn't tell me what I need to know. "supposed to" could mean "you should change it but you can leave it as it is if you want", or it could mean "the runtime assumes that this is the case". Saying it is "by default" suggests that this is implemented automatically and that you have to disable it if you don't want it. But you go on to say that it can be disabled and in the next paragraph you say that it has to be enabled (implemented?) by the developer.

*Can you make this clearer as to whether this is something that has to be implemented by the developer and that the login2 API gives them the ability to do this, or whether this is something that is being implemented "by default" for offline-first applications (i.e. by making an app offline-first this mechanism is automatically applied)*

Author: Here I am referring to apps that have not been upgraded we kept our runtime backwards compatible (can handle both approaches).

Author: `New offline-first applications created in version 10.9.0 or above will use the authentication token approach if they enable it`.
 we expect they will use the new login2 client API but if they use login It will also utilize the token system by default as mentioned before as they are offline.

Reviewer: Here we are talking about apps which are above 10.9 (either new or upgraded) not ones below, so I don't think we should be talking about preserving anything. If they are below 10.9 they will be using an older runtime version.

And if they are below 10.9 they will be calling the login API, so they will get the behaviour that they had with the login API and I don't think we need to mention that either.

I don't understand how using the old API in an app above 10.9 can also utilize the token system by default - in the past they had to set up long-lived sessions if they were using the login API.

As far as I can see there are three situations we need to describe clearly:
1) If you are using Mx above 10.9 and new login2 this is what happens
2) If you are using Mx below 10.9 and old login this is what happens
3) If you use Mx above 10.9 and old login you should change to using login2 but it will carry on working as 2) if you don't.

I think that all this "maintains backward compatibility" is not relevant as we are mixing up talking about two different APIs and two different Mendix versions.

Reviewer: and
4. You cannot use login2 with Mendix versions below 10.9

Author: - Regarding backward compatibility: If end users haven't updated their apps on their devices, but the runtime is a newer version, it should still function correctly to accommodate both old and new clients.
- Upgraded `offline` apps that utilize login API, they will use the new token system, as we internally call the new API login2 with authToken enabled.
- New apps (whether offline or online) created with version 10.9 or above now have two options: login2 or login. If they opt to use the authentication token system, they are allowed to use login2 and set the useAuthToken parameter to whatever value they prefer. However, as previously mentioned, if they used the login API and are offline, it will act login2 with the useAuthToken parameter set to true.

Author: I updated the suggestion.

Reviewer: That looks great. I now understand it and the documentation is also clear.
I'll commit your suggestion and now I think we are ready to publish.
